Dry Abresham, also known as Abresham Herb, is a Unani herb made up of components obtained from plant, animal, and mineral sources. It is a semi-solid formulation used most often for general weakness. It provides mental strength in accordance with Unani texts. When manufactured as medicine, it also shows signs of numerous physical disabilities and numerous other issues. It bolsters the heart and mind. People make it by mixing a base (Qiwam) made of sugar or honey with a decoction of herbal or powdered medications. Men blend medications with substances of an animal and mineral origin in addition to herbal ones. After being prepared, the solution is thoroughly triturated to the point where the air components are mixed in and the colour turns white.

Abresham - Bombyx Mori

A benefit of the unani medical system is the herb Abresham. Along with Ayurveda, the name of the Unani system of medicine is highly revered in historical medicinal systems. This Unani system can address a wide range of significant issues, including bodily and mental weakness. Of course, this approach offers a wide range of efficient solutions to a wide range of issues. Numerous of its techniques remove some analogies from the source. Of course, this approach offers a wide range of efficient solutions to a wide range of issues. Herbs of Abresham.

Based on its effects on hemodynamic, antioxidant, histological, and ultrastructural parameters, the present study of Khamira Abresham Hakim Arshad Wala (KAHAW), a preparation of Unani System of Medicine, is able to mitigate the isoproterenol (ISO)-induced cardiac necrosis.

It is a semi-solid preparation, which is particularly used for general debility. It gives strength to the brain and heart and is indicated in several debilities, heart palpitations, weak heart, and liver.

Key Benefits:

Is an effective and potent cardiac tonic with well-known antioxidant properties

An effective herbal tonic for senile debility and quick recovery after prolonged illness

Stimulates the functioning of all major organs of the body and gives a feeling of well being

Useful in removing the weakness of heart

Rectifies palpitation and depression quickly

Strengthens the brain and liver and is chief potent tonic during the convalescent period